---
layout: sublime
title: Why We Start Conflict
date: 2022-03-16T10:20:00Z
---

## Preface

Every now and then I find myself in a situation where I have a friend that just seems to want to start conflict. I am not talking about someone doing something that incredibly offends another person and thus causes conflict, but rather someone trying to make an issue out of nothing. It makes absolutely no sense. We consider each other friends and I consider them to be pretty emotionally regulated people. I understand that people can have bad days and that there are external stressors that can throw a person off. I also understand that people aren't perfectly rational, but there must be some explanation for this incredibly irrational behavior. In general when I find myself in these situations I end up banging my head trying to rationalize the irrational like some unsolvable problem.

## The Magic Relationship Ratio

I didn't have an answer for this until I stumbled upon John Gottman's 5:1 rule for making relationships work. The Gottman institute conducted a study and found the number one predictor for if a relationship would last. The predictor was the ratio of positive to negative interactions in the relationship. You can theorize a relationship where you have only negative interactions and everything always goes horribly. As you can predict these relationships fail, since no one wants to be in a relationship where they are always in conflict. On the flip end you can theorize a relationship that only has positive interactions. It sounds great on paper, but what the study found is that these relationships also fail.

This is perplexing at first, since it begs the question "Why would anyone want conflict in their relationship?". Sure conflict it inevitable, but why is it desired? The evolutionary psychology theory is that conflict stimulates the same neurons in our brain of being challenged. Being challenged gives you the opportunity to overcome challenge. Overcoming challenge causes you to grow. Evolution favors species that grow, so our brains developed the process of releasing dopamine whenever we overcome challenge. That high you get when you accomplish a difficult task ... it's the same when you come to a nice conclusion in a heated argument.

Okay so there has to be some conflict in order for people to feel like they are growing in their relationships. What the Gottman study found is that on average this ratio of positive to negative interaction is 5:1. 5 positive interactions to every 1 negative interaction. Too much more or too much less and you are no longer happy in your relationship. This begs the question "why not a 1:1 to ratio?". This can be explained by the fact that people are risk adverse and so they perceive a negative interaction to be more negative than it actually is. It's why you can charge someone 1 dollar for a 70% chance of winning 2 dollars and they still won't take it. Mathematically it's a 0.4 dollar expected profit, but the pain of losing a dollar exceeds the happiness from winning two dollars.

Okay fast forward to modern times and the idea that conflict is "inevitable". The idea that one is guaranteed to run into challenges in everyday life just doesn't apply anymore. The same driving forces we had in the animal kingdom to grow just aren't around anymore. It's not like most people living in cities are being asked to grow their own food and face the consequences of a draught. Nor are people living in high rise condos having to worry about running into a lion and fighting them with just a spear and shield. Most real needs are met already with are highly efficient modern lifestyle. This leads to us to look for "growth opportunities" in our interaction with people. Unfortunately that usually leads to meaningless conflict, since most conflict among people aren't inherently meaningful. Does it really matter how the chores of a house are split? Does it really matter if two people have different work styles? Does it really matter what some random person does that you will never have to see again? It doesn't, but I get that it bothers a lot of us (myself included ... why do you think I am wasting so much time writing this? And I am guessing it also bothers you, since you are wasting a lot of time reading this. Have you thought about starting a homestead instead?), since it's all we have to worry about.

## Thoughts

I want to "challenge" (no pun intended) the 5:1 ratio Gottman has. Does every relationship have to have a 5:1 ratio of positive to negative interactions or do we just want to be challenged in our lives as a whole? I ask this, because I believe that we don't need to look for conflict and challenge solely in our relationships with people. I am proposing that we find challenges that we find meaningful that don't involve annoying other people. Things like wanting to be better at our craft or being a better partner, parent, coworker or trying to grow the next generation. Things that provide self actualization and real meaning in life. I mention this because I think trying to tell a person who is looking for conflict to stop causing conflict is like asking an alcoholic to stop drinking. The alcohol isn't the problem ... it's just the symptom. There is something causing a person to want to drink alcohol. Just like there is something causing someone to want to start conflict. That person just doesn't feel challenged. Try to give them (or yourself) meaningful challenges that will grow them.
