---
layout: sublime
title: What Makes a Good Assignment
date: 2017-01-24T10:20:00Z
---

## Assignments Are Teaching

Many people think that writing good assignments is out of the scope of an instructor. The idea is that an instructors job to teach and I think that is a good start. But the notion of teaching is kind of fuzzy. People think that a teacher is only working when they are lecturing. This misconception comes from the idea that when an instructor is not actively interacting with a student, then they aren't teaching. But people forget that the job of an instructor never really ends. As an instructor you are responsible for giving lectures that effectively communicate complex concepts and ultimately to add your own insight probably isn't in a textbook or wikipedia. Out side of lecture you have office hours that is easily an extension of lecture in the sense that it's where you get to clarify questions that your students have. Even when your students aren't actively working on your course your job is to motivate them to keep practicing their craft. And even when they are done with your course you are supposed to inspire the next generation to master the craft that you live for. However most people neglect assignments. An easy example is when an math instructor assigns problems out of a textbook. What people forget is that a bad instructor will be like "I want you do work out all the odd numbered problems in chapter 1.3 this week". A great instructor will personally work out all those problems and figure out which ones effectively teach the concepts they are coming across. And this is a recurring trend I see in a lot of instructors. They are masters at lecturing and inspiring, but neglect assignments. They neglect assignments, since they think it's just mental exercises that the student is supposed to do on their own to get better. Imagine if a personal trainer at the gym was said "Okay I want you to go to the gym and do some bench presses, deadlifts, and squats. Next week you should the same thing again but with slightly more weights.". You would probably fire that instructor. A good instructor would say "So we need to clear here. What are your goals? Lose weight? Get stronger? Look more symmetric?". And after communicating with you on your goals they would proscribe movements that will help you reach those goals. They would never make you lift for lifting sake.

When I am not probing my student’s minds I am writing assignments. When I write an assignment, I imagine myself as route setter for rock climbers. When approached with a wall, I lay out a route for my students, so that they can experience what it is like to overcome barriers. I then climb this wall adding the hooks for them to cling on to and taking note of the sharp turns that they will struggle with. My favorite part of writing assignments is knowing that I am keeping students accountable. It is only until the students get to a lab and are forced to write something that they understand the difference between passively listening to a lecture and having to write solid code. Understanding how little you actually understand is a quintessential moment in learning. Finally, when I write an assignment, I love to make them open ended and give students all the opportunities to demonstrate to me that they understand the material. Assignments are an important part of learning, which is why I make writing them an important part of teaching. The following are three things that I think contribute to making a good assignment.

## Instructions

Instructions are what makes or breaks the execution of an assignment. Bad instructions can ruin an assignment that has perfect learning objectives and really shows the inner workings of complex ideas. Without good instructions your students will never have the opportunity to apply the concepts you teach in class. Bad instructions ultimately leads to students being unable to demonstrate their mastery of the material which discourages them from learning. Imagine if you trying to learn how to swim, but someone gives you instructions on how to climb a tree; you might just drown instead of learning to swim. Good instructions  follows the three "Cs of communication" which are "clarity",  "correctness", "completeness".

### Clarity

Clarity is what allows your instructions to lead your students through an assignment. If your instructions are not clear then have no way of actually doing the assignment meaning they don't learn anything from it. Good instructions make it obvious what the purpose of the assignment is. I handle this by start off my assignment with the list of learning objectives. This alleviates the problem with students wondering "why am I even doing this assignment". You also need to be clear what the scope of the assignment is and make sure that all inputs and outputs are well defined along with possible edge cases. One thing that is tricky about being clear is balancing between being clear and leaving room for learning. An obviously clear set of instruction on what the students need to accomplish is the solution itself, but that compromises their opportunity to learn. On the flip side if your students constantly needs to make assumptions and "reading in between the lines" then they will have all the opportunity to learn, since this matches the real world, but doesn't leave much time for them to actually be doing the assignment. Finally you want to strive for communicating what your students have to do in the least complicated way possible without sacrificing correctness.

### Correctness

Correctness is what shapes your students experience of the assignment. You want them to struggle to master difficult concepts, but what you don't want is for them to waste time going through your errors. You want your assignments to be error free. You should ensure that technical terms are used appropriately and that everything is well defined. Correctness also includes the little things that makes a big difference. You should spend the extra 10 minutes reading over your instructions to make sure they are grammatically correct. Imagine a student who is already struggling to figure out how to do your assignment running into grammatical errors that break their train of thought. A similar argument can be made for spelling mistakes and typos, since they are very distracting for your readers. Finally you want to go the whole nine yards and make sure that everything is formatted appropriately.

### Completeness

Completeness for your instructions means that your students have everything they need to know in order to succeed. You need to make sure that everything you graded for were in the instructions. If you don't mention what you are grading for it's being acted to run and then being graded for how high you can jump. Ultimately your instructions should tell everything your students need to do in order to get full points. Some instructors resolve this issue by giving the rubric out with the assignment. Finally you should be include everything they need to know for submitting the assignment. This includes exact deadlines meaning that you shouldn't just say "the assignment is due on Monday.". Does that mean Monday 00:00 or Monday midnight? You should also mention how you want your assignment turned in. This means that "Place it on my desk" is not sufficient if you don't ever mention where your desk is. If your assignment is like an essay and you say "I want at least 3 page and no more than 4 pages", then you better clarify the font size and whether it's double spaced and/or double sided.

## Pedagogy

### Learning Objectives
### Learning to Work Ratio
### Leaves Room for Learning

## Grading

### Completeness / Coverage / Fairness
### Correctness
